1. What is the difference between package.json and package-lock.json?

* package.json contains project metadata, dependencies, and scripts.
* package-lock.json stores the exact versions of all installed dependencies, ensuring consistent installations across environments.

2. What is the difference between ^ and ~ in dependency versions?

* ^ allows updates to minor and patch versions.
* ~ allows only patch version updates.

These symbols help manage dependency updates without introducing unexpected changes.

3. What is the difference between null and undefined?

* undefined indicates that a variable has been declared but not assigned a value.
* null is an intentional assignment that represents the absence of a value.

4. JavaScript Output-Based Questions

The interview also included output-based questions to assess understanding of:

* Closures
* Hoisting
* Event Loop
* Variable Scope
* this keyword
* Promise execution order


Instead of multiple rounds and endless discussions, I focused on three questions in the very first call:

→ Walk me through a typical day in your current role.
→ Why are you looking to make a change?
→ If this is the right opportunity, how soon can you join?

Those three questions told me almost everything I needed to know.

→ Did the candidate actually understand the role?
→ Were they moving for the right reasons?~
→ Could they meet the hiring timeline?


Problem Statement

Build a dynamic Accordion component in React.js using the following JSON structure:

- "id"
- "name" (Accordion title)
- "strings" (Array of content)

Requirements

✅ Render accordions dynamically from JSON.
✅ Display "name" as the accordion header.
✅ Render the "strings" array as the accordion content.
✅ Expand/Collapse on header click.
✅ Use "id" as the React "key".
✅ Write clean, reusable, and optimized code.

Although I couldn't complete the task within the interview, it was a valuable learning experience. Live coding tests not only evaluate coding skills but also debugging, time management, and problem-solving under pressure.


🔎 𝐑𝐨𝐮𝐧𝐝 𝟏 (𝐃𝐒𝐀 + 𝐇𝐋𝐃):

1. Dynamic Programming Questions.
  Questions focusing on Dynamic Programming algorithms and techniques.

2. Design an End-to-End Delivery Tracking System.
  Design an end-to-end Delivery Tracking System.

🔎 𝐑𝐨𝐮𝐧𝐝 𝟐 (𝐇𝐋𝐃):

1. Design Dropbox From Scratch.
  Design Dropbox from scratch — with deep dives on requirements, tradeoffs, architectural decisions, schema designs, and further optimizati...

🔎 𝐑𝐨𝐮𝐧𝐝 𝟑 (𝐋𝐋𝐃 + 𝐒𝐲𝐬𝐭𝐞𝐦 𝐃𝐞𝐬𝐢𝐠𝐧 — 𝐢𝐧 𝐩𝐞𝐫𝐬𝐨𝐧):

1. Resume Deep Dive and Service Migration Patterns.
  Discuss resume projects in detail, focusing on various architectural patterns for migration between microservices.

2. Hands-on Concurrency Coding Problem.
  Solve a hands-on concurrency coding problem demonstrating multithreading concepts and thread safety.

3. Design Zomato's Core Restaurant and Menu Services.
  Deep dive on designing Zomato's core services including restaurant services, schema design for menus with item variants and pricing, opti...

🔎 𝐑𝐨𝐮𝐧𝐝 𝟒 (𝐜𝐮𝐥𝐭𝐮𝐫𝐞 𝐟𝐢𝐭 — 𝐢𝐧 𝐩𝐞𝐫𝐬𝐨𝐧):

1. Values and Problem-Solving Mindset.
  Assessment focused on personal values, thought process, and overall approach to solving problems.®


Think about these common interview questions: Accordion, Tabs, Search, Modal
They all look different.
But they all become much simpler once you answer one question:
Who owns this state?

For example:  
Accordion - Parent owns the active section.
Tabs - Parent owns the active tab.
Search - Parent owns the search query.
Modal - Parent owns whether it's 

𝗜𝗻𝘁𝗲𝗿𝘃𝗶𝗲𝘄 𝗙𝗼𝗰𝘂𝘀 𝗔𝗿𝗲𝗮𝘀
 • JavaScript Internals
 • Closures & Prototypes
 • React/UI Engineering
 • Machine Coding
 • HTML & CSS
 • Browser APIs
 • Performance Optimization
 • Accessibility
 • Frontend System Design
 • Behavioral & Leadership


 𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟭 - 𝗛𝗥 + 𝗧𝗲𝗰𝗵 𝗦𝗰𝗿𝗲𝗲𝗻𝗶𝗻𝗴:
They expect you to be clear on:
- Your background with core CS fundamentals and the systems you've built
- Projects you have built and the scale/ownership involved
- Salary expectations and notice period
- Why Flipkart, team alignment, and growth mindset

Expect questions such as:
- Walk me through the most complex system you've built
- What was the hardest bug you debugged in production?
- How do you approach breaking down an ambiguous problem?

𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟮 - 𝗗𝗦𝗔 / 𝗠𝗮𝗰𝗵𝗶𝗻𝗲 𝗖𝗼𝗱𝗶𝗻𝗴:
Common tasks:
- Two medium-to-hard DSA problems (graphs, DP, or sliding window style)
- Focus on time/space complexity trade-offs, not just a working solution
- Follow-up questions that change constraints mid-interview

Typical aspects:
- Solving under a live constraint change (for example, "now the array is a stream")
- Explaining why you chose one data structure over another
- Handling edge cases without being prompted
- Prioritising a working, well-reasoned approach over rushing to code

𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟯 - 𝗦𝘆𝘀𝘁𝗲𝗺 𝗗𝗲𝘀𝗶𝗴𝗻:
Topics they go deep into:
- Designing a system end to end (for example, an order/inventory service at scale)
- Database choices, sharding, and indexing trade-offs
- Caching strategies and cache invalidation
- Handling consistency vs availability trade-offs
- Queueing, async processing, and failure recovery
- Capacity estimation and back-of-the-envelope math

Example discussions:
- How would you design an inventory system that stays consistent during a flash sale?
- SQL vs NoSQL, and how do you decide for a given access pattern?
- How do you handle a hot partition when one seller gets 10x traffic overnight?

𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟰 - 𝗛𝗶𝗿𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗠𝗮𝗻𝗮𝗴𝗲𝗿 / 𝗢𝘄𝗻𝗲𝗿𝘀𝗵𝗶𝗽:
They ask:
- Behavioural and project-based questions using a STAR-style format (for example, describing situations where you handled ambiguity or took ownership)
- System trade-off reasoning and prioritisation-oriented discussions, similar in style to real design decisions under deadline pressure
- Cultural fit evaluation, including growth mindset, collaboration style, and how you operate under pressure


𝗖𝗼𝗿𝗲 𝗝𝗮𝘃𝗮 & 𝗟𝗮𝗻𝗴𝘂𝗮𝗴𝗲 𝗙𝗲𝗮𝘁𝘂𝗿𝗲𝘀:
1. What are the key features of Java 17?
2. What is the var keyword? Can it be used with generics?
3. What is an effectively final variable in Java?
4. What is a Record class? How do you map query results to Records and fetch the first record?
5. What is Optional? When should it be used?
6. What are checked exceptions? Their pros and cons?
7. How does exception handling work in Spring Boot? What is @ControllerAdvice?
8. How do you reverse a String without using built-in methods?
9. Can mutable objects be used as HashMap keys? What issues can arise?

𝗜𝗻𝘁𝗲𝗿𝗳𝗮𝗰𝗲𝘀 & 𝗢𝗢𝗣:
10. Can interfaces have private methods? Why are they used?
11. What types of methods are allowed in an interface?
12. What if two interfaces have the same default method? How do you resolve it?
13. What are SOLID principles?
14. What is LSP (Liskov Substitution Principle)?
15. What is Factory Design Pattern?

𝗖𝗼𝗻𝗰𝘂𝗿𝗿𝗲𝗻𝗰𝘆 & 𝗠𝘂𝗹𝘁𝗶𝘁𝗵𝗿𝗲𝗮𝗱𝗶𝗻𝗴:
16. synchronized vs ReentrantLock?
17. What is volatile in Java?
18. volatile vs Atomic classes (AtomicInteger, AtomicLong)?
19. What is CompletableFuture in Java?

𝗦𝘁𝗿𝗲𝗮𝗺𝘀 & 𝗙𝘂𝗻𝗰𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻𝗮𝗹 𝗣𝗿𝗼𝗴𝗿𝗮𝗺𝗺𝗶𝗻𝗴:
20. Difference between sequential and parallel Streams? When to use Parallel Streams in production?
21. Difference between map() and flatMap() with example.

𝗦𝗽𝗿𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗙𝗿𝗮𝗺𝗲𝘄𝗼𝗿𝗸 & 𝗦𝗽𝗿𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗕𝗼𝗼𝘁:
22. How does Spring Container work?
23. What is Bean Lifecycle in Spring?
24. What is @EnableAutoConfiguration?
25. Difference between @Qualifier and @Primary?
26. What is IoC vs DI?
27. What is Dependency Injection? Types?
28. What are Spring Profiles?
29. @PathVariable vs @RequestParam?
30. How does @Transactional work?
31. Lazy vs Eager Loading?

𝗦𝗽𝗿𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗦𝗲𝗰𝘂𝗿𝗶𝘁𝘆 & 𝗝𝗪𝗧:
32. What is Spring Security?
33. How do you implement authentication & authorization in Spring Security?
34. How is Spring Security handled in microservices architecture?
35. What is JWT and how is it used for security in your projects?

Continuing my series on interview experiences, where I share the lessons, challenges, and takeaways from different stages of my journey.

💻 Online Assessment (OA)
The OA focused on coding and problem-solving, along with work-style/work-simulation assessments. The exact format can vary depending on the role and hiring cycle.

🏢 Interview Structure (4 Rounds)
The interview process evaluated candidates across:
-DSA / Problem Solving
-Amazon Leadership Principles
-Frontend System Design
-AI Fluency

👉 Round 1 – Technical: JavaScript, HTML/CSS & frontend fundamentals.
👉 Round 2 – Technical: Frontend coding, problem-solving & JavaScript concepts.
👉 Round 3 – System Design: Frontend architecture, scalability, performance & design decisions.
👉 Round 4 (Bar Raiser) – Leadership Principles + technical discussion.

📌 Some key highlights:
-Strong emphasis on JavaScript fundamentals rather than only framework knowledge.
-Expect practical frontend coding and problem-solving questions.
-Frontend System Design becomes increasingly important at mid/senior levels.
-Leadership Principles are evaluated throughout the process, not just in the Bar Raiser.
-Be prepared to explain your technical decisions, trade-offs and real-world project experience.

💡Round 1 – Technical
 1️⃣ Write a React component that fetches data from an API and displays it in a table.
 2️⃣ What is the difference between state and props in React?
 3️⃣ Explain React Hooks and when you would use useEffect vs useLayoutEffect.
 4️⃣ How would you optimize a React app for performance?
 5️⃣ Explain event delegation in JavaScript.
 6️⃣ Write a CSS layout using Flexbox or Grid to make a responsive design.
 7️⃣ What are Web Components, and how do they differ from React components?
 8️⃣ How would you handle cross-browser compatibility issues?
 9️⃣ Explain the Virtual DOM and how React uses it to improve performance.

💡Round 2 – Technical / System Design
 1️⃣ How would you design a real-time chat application using React and WebSocket?
 2️⃣ Explain the architecture of a frontend-heavy web application you built.
 3️⃣ You need to migrate a large legacy JavaScript codebase to TypeScript. How would you approach it?
 4️⃣ How do you handle API versioning and inconsistent response formats in your frontend app?
 5️⃣ Explain how you would measure and improve frontend performance (e.g., page load, rendering).
 6️⃣ How would you design a component library for reuse across multiple projects?

💡Round 3 – Managerial / Behavioral
 1️⃣ Tell me about a time you resolved a production bug under tight deadlines.
 2️⃣ How do you explain technical frontend concepts to non-technical stakeholders?
 3️⃣ How do you manage delivery when a client has unrealistic expectations?
 4️⃣ Describe a situation where you had to coordinate with designers, backend engineers, and QA.
 5️⃣ What steps do you take to ensure continuous learning in frontend technologies?
 6️⃣ How do you prioritize tasks when working under tight deadlines?

 𝗥𝗘𝗔𝗖𝗧 𝗕𝗔𝗦𝗜𝗖
1) What is the difference between React.createElement and JSX under the hood?
2) How does React handle key prop warnings and why do they matter?
3) What is the difference between a controlled and uncontrolled input in React?
4) How does React.Children.map differ from a regular array map?
5) What is the purpose of displayName in React components?

𝗥𝗘𝗔𝗖𝗧 𝗜𝗡𝗧𝗘𝗥𝗠𝗘𝗗𝗜𝗔𝗧𝗘
1) What is the difference between a Higher Order Component and a custom hook?
2) How would you implement a render props pattern and when is it still useful?
3) What is the difference between useTransition and useDeferredValue?
4) How do you test a component that uses useEffect with React Testing Library?
5) What is the difference between React portals and rendering inside a parent?

𝗥𝗘𝗔𝗖𝗧 𝗔𝗗𝗩𝗔𝗡𝗖𝗘𝗗
1) How does React 19 handle form actions and what replaces useState for form state?
2) What is the use() hook in React 19 and how does it change data fetching patterns?
3) How would you implement a fully accessible data table with sorting and pagination in React?
4) How does React handle hydration of server rendered components with async data?
5) How would you design a React architecture that allows gradual migration from class to functional components?

o:
“Can you design and reason about a production system?”
Some of the questions I was asked:
• Explain Angular Architecture.
 • Design a Payment Gateway flow.
 • Explain Design Patterns and Singleton Pattern in Angular.
 • How would you share data between two Android WebViews?
 • How would you securely call an API without exposing user credentials?
 • What are Angular Directives?
 • What are Decorators?
 • Explain the Angular Component Lifecycle.
 • Explain Module Federation.
 • Application Federation vs Component Federation.
 • How would you securely store credentials without a backend?


 The first round included questions around:
• JavaScript Hoisting
 • Angular 19+ features
 • Signals vs RxJS
 • Signals in depth
 • Deep vs Shallow Copy
 • Micro Frontends
 • Jasmine/Karma
 • Coding problems



Interview Preparation Websites:

1. InterviewBit - interviewbit.com
2. Glassdoor - glassdoor.com
3. Interviewing.io - interviewing.io
4. Jobscan Interview Prep - jobscan.co/interview
5. Indeed Interview Tips - indeed.com/career-advice
6. CareerCup - careercup.com
7. The Muse - themuse.com
8. PrepLounge - preplounge.com
9. Big Interview - biginterview.com
10. LinkedIn Learning - linkedin.com/learning

1. How to display dynamic html data in react ?
2. How do you send data from parent component to child component in react ?
3. How to call parent component method from child component in react ?
4. How do you access the DOM element ?
5. How to bind array/array of objects to dropdown in react ?
6. Create a lazy loaded component in react ?
7. How to display data entered by the user in another textbox ?
8. How to loop array/array of objects in react ?
9. How to conditionally render an element or text in react ?
10. How to change styles based on condition in react ?
11. How to dhow and hide data based on condition in react ?
12.Bind array/array of objects to radio button in react ?
13.Display radio button data selected by user in another textbox ?
14. How to call a method when component is rendered for the first time in react ?
15.Display keys and values of objects in a loop in react?
16. How to rerender a component on value change in react ?
17. How to call a method on every rerender of a component ?
18. How to add data into useState array in functional component in react ?
19. Create a search textbox filter ?
20.Create a counter component using useState ?
21.Create a counter component using useReducer ?
22.Change focus/enable/disable textbox in child component based on parent component button click ? 
23. How to perform debouncing ?
24.Create a component to fetch data from api ?
25.Force a component to rerender with out using useState in react ?
26. How to call a method immediately after state is updated or 
after component is rerendered ?
27. How to display number of characters remaining functionality for textarea using react useRef?
28.Given two dropdowns, select 2nd dropdown options based on value selected in one dropdown ?
(Load states based on country selected)
29.Perform type checking using prop-types ?
30.Share data between components using context api ?
31.Give an example of optimization using useMemo ?
32.Give an example of optimization using usecallbacks in react ?
33.Create an error boundary component in react ?
34. How to display dropdown value selected by user in another textbox ?
35.Create a pure component ?
36.Create a controlled and uncontrolled component in react ?
37.Create a custom hook using ?
38.Create a popup using portal ?
39.Which lifecycle hooks in class component are replaced with useEffect in functional components ? 
40.Create a pagination component ?
41. How do you safeguard your application ?


𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟮: 𝗢𝗻𝘀𝗶𝘁𝗲 𝗣𝗲𝗲𝗿 𝗣𝗿𝗼𝗴𝗿𝗮𝗺𝗺𝗶𝗻𝗴
This was an onsite round and was the most frontend-focused part of the interview.

The task was to build a React autocomplete/search component

JavaScript tries running at 60 frames per second.

We can assume that each frame will take around 16 ms.

The concept is important to understand React's re-rendering impact. 

If rendering takes more than 16 ms, it will look sluggish on the UI.

As React reconciles and update DOM, the browser too has to perform styling, paints, etc.

We can expect the JavaScript window to be 10ms.

On 120hz screen, the 16 ms is reduced to around 8 ms.

For simple applications, it won't look much, but with complex animations and effects, it will likely impact.

To improve React performance:

1. Avoid unnecessary state updates
2. useTransition and useDeferredValue for non-urgent updates
3. Virtualize Large Lists
4. memoize expensive work
5. Use useRef where possible

21. Given an array:

{1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1}

Move all 0s to the end.

22. Find the middle node of a LinkedList.



🚀 Capgemini L2 React Interview — Questions You Should Prepare

I recently prepared for a Capgemini L2 round, and these were some of the key topics/questions asked:

1️⃣ React Concurrency
→ What is concurrent rendering?
→ Real use case of useTransition/useDeferredValue
→ How does React prioritise updates?

2️⃣ Currying & Advanced Currying
→ What is currying?
→ Partial application vs currying
→ Infinite/advanced currying implementation

3️⃣ Web Vitals
→ LCP, CLS, INP
→ What causes CLS?
→ How would you improve Web Vitals?

4️⃣ CSS Preprocessor & Postprocessor
→ SASS/SCSS vs PostCSS
→ Where and why would you use them?
→ How does the build pipeline process CSS?

5️⃣ React Performance
“How would you optimise a React application?”

Be ready to discuss:
→ Unnecessary re-renders
→ React.memo
→ useMemo/useCallback
→ Code splitting & lazy loading
→ Virtualisation
→ API caching
→ Bundle optimisation
→ Debouncing/throttling

6️⃣ React 18 Features
→ Automatic batching
→ Concurrent rendering
→ useTransition
→ useDeferredValue
→ Suspense improvements
→ Streaming SSR

7️⃣ React Fiber
→ What is Fiber?
→ Render vs Commit phase
→ Reconciliation
→ Prioritisation of work
→ How Fiber enables concurrent features

8️⃣ JavaScript Event Loop
→ Call Stack
→ Microtasks
→ Tasks/Macrotasks
→ Execution priority
→ Event-loop starvation

9️⃣ Next.js — Architecture & Rendering Strategies
→ What are the key features of Next.js?
→ Why would you choose Next.js over a traditional React SPA?
→ SSR vs CSR vs SSG vs ISR
→ When would you use each rendering strategy?
→ Server Components vs Client Components
→ Streaming and Suspense
→ File-based routing
→ Dynamic routes
→ API/Route Handlers
→ Image/font optimisation
→ Metadata & SEO
→ Caching and revalidation
→ Middleware
→ How would you optimise a Next.js e-commerce application?



The interview process consisted of four rounds covering JavaScript, React, problem-solving, machine coding, SSR/CSR, Webpack, testing, and behavioral questions.

Unfortunately, the candidate was eliminated in the final round, but the questions provide a good overview of what frontend engineers can expect.

𝗜𝗻𝘁𝗲𝗿𝘃𝗶𝗲𝘄 𝗣𝗿𝗼𝗰𝗲𝘀𝘀
 • Technical Round 1
 • Technical Round 2 + Machine Coding
 • Hiring Manager Round
 • Cross-Functional Round

𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱 𝟭: 𝗧𝗲𝗰𝗵𝗻𝗶𝗰𝗮𝗹 𝗥𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱
Duration: 1 Hour

The first round focused primarily on JavaScript, React, and problem-solving.

1. JavaScript Output-Based Questions
The interviewer provided JavaScript snippets and asked:
 • What will be the output?
 • Why will this output occur?
 • What happens internally?

Typical areas to prepare include:
 • Event loop
 • Closures
 • Hoisting
 • this
 • Promises
 • async/await
 • Microtasks and macrotasks
 • Scope
 • Type coercion


 Here's your ultimate cheat sheet 

1. Video Streaming 
Netflix • Amazon Prime • YouTube • Disney+ • Twitch 
Design a video streaming platform, live streaming service, or video-on-demand system. 
Key concepts: CDN, adaptive bitrate streaming, video encoding, caching, storage

2. Messaging & Chat 
WhatsApp • Slack • Messenger • Telegram • Discord 
Design a real-time chat app or group messaging system. 
Key concepts: WebSockets, message queues, delivery receipts, presence, E2E encryption

3. Ride-Sharing & Location 
Uber • Lyft • Ola • Google Maps 
Design a ride-hailing service or location-tracking system. 
Key concepts: Geohashing, QuadTrees, matching algorithms, real-time GPS updates

4. E-Commerce & Marketplace 
Amazon • Flipkart • eBay • Shopify
Design an online store, cart, or inventory management system. 
Key concepts: Payment gateways, inventory locking, search, recommendations

5. Social Media & Feed 
Instagram • Twitter/X • Facebook • LinkedIn • TikTok 
Design a news feed, follow system, or trending topics. 
Key concepts: Fan-out (push/pull), timeline generation, sharding, ranking

6. URL Shortener & Utilities
Bit.ly • TinyURL • Pastebin
Design a URL shortener or unique ID generator. 
Key concepts: Hashing, Base62 encoding, key generation, redirection at scale

7. Food Delivery 
Swiggy • Zomato • DoorDash • Uber Eats
Design a food ordering & delivery tracking system. 
Key concepts: Real-time tracking, order state machines, ETA prediction

8. File Storage & Sharing 
Google Drive • Dropbox • OneDrive
Design a cloud storage or file-sync service. 
Key concepts: Chunking, deduplication, conflict resolution, metadata management

9. Notifications & Rate Limiting 
Push notifications • Email systems • API Rate Limiters
Design a notification service or rate limiter. 
Key concepts: Message queues, fan-out, token bucket, sliding window

10. Booking Systems 
BookMyShow • Airbnb • MakeMyTrip • OpenTable 
Design a ticket/hotel booking system. 
Key concepts: Concurrency control, seat locking, distributed transactions

Here are some questions asked around JavaScript, React.js and Node.js:

JavaScript

1. Find the maximum number in an array without using "Math.max()":

let arr = [1, 5, 3, 9, 2, 1];

2. Group the following array of objects based on the "hour" property:

let arr = [
  { hour: 1, data: 'a' },
  { hour: 2, data: 'b' },
  { hour: 1, data: 'c' },
  { hour: 3, data: 'd' },
  { hour: 2, data: 'e' },
  { hour: 1, data: 'f' }
];

3. Can you optimize the above solution and solve it in a single iteration?

React.js

4. What are the different types of Hooks in React.js?

5. What is the difference between "useCallback()" and "useMemo()"?

6. What are Error Boundaries in React.js?

Node.js

7. What is "process.nextTick()" in Node.js?

8. Explain the architecture of Node.js.

9. What are threads? How does Node.js handle threads?